American Psycho on Second Order Society

The 1986 film, American Psycho, concludes with the elation of Patrick Bateman, who after manically killing of dozens of innocents is forgiven by the perfect aloofness of his colleagues; aloofness so eclipsing as to render his atrocities literal delusion.

The rug is pulled from Bateman and the audience and the focus of the film instantly narrows towards all that is left which is credibly real in the story: wallows of guilt followed by bewilderingly sudden, complete absolvement.


A composition of the vivid, dark, humorous reflections of the highly privileged and inherited class of Wall Street financier plods towards a surreal conclusion which does not lend itself to literal or material rationalizations - lest the subject of the film be literally about psychological delusion, the impetus on symbolic interpretation could hardly be any stronger.

Considering the steps taken throughout the film to highlight its superficial, detached and socially aloof setting, it is reasonable to limit one's interpretation of the film's message towards a critique of Wall Street pathology, or what this review will refer to more generally as *Second Order Capitalism.*


Second Order Capitalism is the management of financial tools - the meta-business layer, in contrast to First Order Capitalism which provides direct material value to one or more parties.

Second Order Capitalism, despite it's tactile detachment to first order value, has very real and powerful effects on economies and societies.


One key trait of any *second order* paradigm is the natural obfuscation of it's first order consequences; most grief caused by Second Order Capitalism is materially absolved and spiritually inconsequential to the sufficiently unobservant.

What it takes to evade such Karma is a culture which is authentically cynical, and more ironically, ignorant; qualities the setting of the film is steeped in.

What makes Bateman a reflective character is his inability to authentically participate in a setting neccisitant of these traits - he instead is neurotically determined and imparedly self-aware thus requiring great lengths on his part to even tolerate his surroundings.


Bateman tells the audience straight away he is a shell with no emotions; this performance following through the fourth wall is his introduction to the audience, but to Bateman it is an affirmation.

His ability to socially navigate his environment is clearly and repeatedly demonstrated as a conscious act.

His self-awareness, determination and self-reinforcement betray that Bateman's entire personality, including his own attempt at ignorance, is decidedly self-maintained and unnatural.

Bateman understands the necessity of ignorance, and his psychosis stems from his conscious pursuit to split his mind.

The carefully planned morning routine to maintain his exterior appropriately interweaves this psychological affirmation.


And if his claim to extreme stoicism ring too true, one only has to cite that Bateman is obviously a killer of passion to find incredibility in the psycho's self-reflections.

Further exacerbating his fragile state, Bateman's own contrived performance only serves to torment his basal emotions even more.

As if to mock Bateman's open wounds, *the suppression of emotions itself* is routine behavior such that even in moments of civil vulnerability the exposure of Bateman's hidden self is never considered of special concern until it is too late.

Both in mimicking the aversion to vulnerability of his peers, and in desperately holding himself in check, the suppression of his emotions are participant of the shows he puts on; his whispers and whimpers for help are masked, not by Bateman, but by his setting.

Damaging his own mind to be more authentically detached is the sacrifice committed, though his work may require such little humanity,  his relationships serve to test Bateman throughout the film and burn through his superficiality much more quickly.

And despite that fact, Bateman pursues these relationships, as if he craves the last bastion of his humanity which surfaces when his mask is taken to the brink.


Batemans's facade, in success and failure, is so shallow that those watching the film cannot help but feel visceral moral superiority over that exclusive society which is materially and powerfully superior to most all - that is, to laugh.

The high stakes of such shallow interactions are driven home and made all the more ridiculous by serving as the motivations for Bateman's equally obscene killings, which serve as extreme comedy: the emotional mishaps of one character followed by disastrous resolutions, but unless the meaning from the film is an allegory on how to be a less incompetent serial killer, then it is not murder that the film is about, and the fact that the literal killings, are revealed as delusion while his burden of consequence and it's unreciprocation linger, hints that the murders are a symbolic of some other externality.


This review posits that killings stand in place of, and the film's critique centers around, first order externatlities of Second Order Capitalism.

When one understands the distinct trait of Bateman compared to his setting is self-awareness, the immense anticipation of consequence his 'killings' give him, going so perfectly unreciprocated by his peers to the point of being materially a delusion, reflect a lower bound on how emotionally and materially unaccountable his world truly is, and it is this unaccountability and natural state of cynical ignorance which the is the heart of the film's ridicule.


Bateman's struggles to navigate his soulless world is not a result of any inherent morality, he is perfectly amoral.

Batemen's difficulty fitting in is purely technical: his friends and colleagues are happily adapted towards ignorance, and Bateman, if only to serve as a foil, is deeply introspective.


Bateman's final message to the audience highlights his unfulfilled spiritual need to be held accountable.

The self-awareness is strong enough to be revealing to the audience, yet he concludes by throwing it away.

Bateman has been self-aware for the duration of the film, and it is only in conclusion that it is demonstrated directly to the audience; it is what was missing from Batemen's introduction and affirmation at the beginning of the film, yet both are followed by a conscious pursuit of ignorance.


"There are no more barriers to cross. All I have in common with the uncontrollable and the insane, the vicious and the evil, all the mayhem I have caused and my utter indifference toward it I have now surpassed. My pain is constant and sharp, and I do not hope for a better world for anyone. In fact, I want my pain to be inflicted on others. I want no one to escape. But even after admitting this, there is no catharsis; my punishment continues to elude me, and I gain no deeper knowledge of myself. No new knowledge can be extracted from my telling. This confession has meant nothing."


Financiers of inherited status served a relevant environment devoid of guilt during the film's release, and Bateman's dedication to ignorance and the high cost he is willing to pay foreshadowed the survival of such goal oriented amorality well into the next generation, where the social benefits of being free from guilt and accountability, if only through ignorance, now pervade more than just Wall Street, more than just the elites, those seemingly critical of it not withstanding.
