FIRST DRAFT

American Psycho on Second Order Capitalism

American Psycho concludes with the elation of a character who has experienced the manic killing of dozens of innocents, being forgiven by the perfect aloofness of his colleagues. The film makes it materially clear that the killings were fantasy - the simple explanation of this disconnect between realities is the delta between the American Psychos' humanity, and his occupation.

Second Order Capitalism is the management of financial tools - it is the meta-business layer of society.

What it takes to facilitate Second Order Capitalism, Patrick Bateman, cannot stomach. Like a drone pilot raining invisible fiery needles into the desert, any grief caused by Second Order Capitalism is materially absolved, automatically, but spiritually persistent. What it takes to fade such Karma is a carefully crafted veil of ignorance. What Bateman's colleagues have mastered is naivety; Bateman is the autist who sees too clearly how the machine operates to participate authentically.

His somewhat convincing and incredibly stressed performance is made all the more dehumanizing by the careless acceptance his peers give, they cannot know, nor would they choose to, what they do. Bateman is not moralistic. 

Bateman tells the audience straight away he is a shell with no emotions, but his performance following through the fourth wall is the same certainty within a dream that you are not. What it reflects on him is the corruption of his soul to mimic mechanistically what is only achieved naturally through ignorance. As confused as it will make him, Bateman in his genius, recognizes the necessity of ignorance and tears his psyche towards it.

We meet Bateman *post-op* with a consciously corrupted mind and its incoherent soul. Providing his contrived personality runs its short and fragile course, a ripped up soul in need of kindness or vengeance emerges unhindered. It is the primary characters who taunt his performance who meet quick death, and those who can reach beneath with honesty or acceptance who narrowly avoid it.

The elation he feels when the consequence of his killings is rendered immaterial is followed by his narrating to the audience, his affirming to himself, the same initial lie of fabricated ~~ignorance~~ innocence. It is no less convincing in this context than before:

"There are no more barriers to cross. All I have in common with the uncontrollable and the insane, the vicious and the evil, all the mayhem I have caused and my utter indifference toward it I have now surpassed. My pain is constant and sharp, and I do not hope for a better world for anyone. In fact, I want my pain to be inflicted on others. I want no one to escape. But even after admitting this, there is no catharsis; my punishment continues to elude me, and I gain no deeper knowledge of myself. No new knowledge can be extracted from my telling. This confession has meant nothing."

Keen sociopaths understand the value of an honest apology. This apology is enchanting in it's clarity, insight and honesty. It is authentically reflective, deep, and aware. By this point it may be easy to ignore the apathy laced within. Patrick Bateman has clearly evolved spiritually, but his direction remains constant. This great awakening is a spiritually orgasmic, psychologically affirming step down a volatile but sustainable trajectory.
