Please Excuse The Young Men

<p>
What Jordan Peterson and transgenderism have in common is function as release valves for the failures of young men to meet the standards of previous generations.

Each has independent justifications for existence, but they broadly represent two classes of excuse: "I wasn't taught right" and "I'm not treated right."

Both, when stated so simply, are correct - yet both in the practice of their respect ideologies oft end up down a path of delusion and even turmoil between the two.

<p>
Jordan Peterson is right when he explains his own success: young men are desperate to improve themselves.

What Peterson represents is the offering of orientations of mind which will lead to this improvement and which are novel - how could they not be? They mix in archaic wisdom with modern observation.

But the critics of Peterson are correct as well; his life advice boils down to somewhat obvious or traditionally accepted practices: 'clean your room,' 'tell the truth...'

These reminders have value to those who have forgotten and Peterson's ability to contextualize the current moment are what makes them relevant, but it is this novelty in the presentation of basic ideas that is the most compelling.

<p>
Likewise, the advice to be one's self taken to the extremes of transgenderism offers a novel contextualization of trite advice.

Like Peterson, the reasoning that such prescriptions may be swallowed anew is the novelty; the reason it will work now when it didn't before.

The transgender movement is easier to critique, because for every step further it takes it is adopted, branded and highlighted with great internal consensus.

What Peterson represents is more disperse, and without his blessing or participation lives on; and it is a certain derivation of his work so new, popular but at the same time shallow which inspired me to the conclusion of this piece; that is, the rise of videos offering a numerical list of life advice drew me to the conclusion that modern young men *need* excuses.

<p>
Of course, the young men compelled by either conception ("I wasn't taught right", "I'm not treated right") do not, in the midst of it, perceive themselves as searching for scapegoats.

Victimhood and lust for mentorship are seen by those involved as a proactive approach to improving one's circumstances, but in reality real victims are never intentionally so, and very few young men take what mentorship is available to them for arguably rational economic and social reasons; these are not proactive approaches, they are the opposite.

These videos of life advice are the beginning of fully processed, factory produced excuse making on behalf of the viewers.

For every piece of advice with marginal value, a feeling of discovery in the desperate viewer takes place: "Ah! This is what was wrong with me. When I fix this, my life will turn around."

Yet unlike Jordan Peterson, who builds compelling, history spanning theories of behavior and psychology to derive his everyday advice, a listicle of life advice is buckshot - but young men are so often barn walls so desperate for any rationalization of their circumstance as to accept a series of guesses as profound wisdom.

And, like Peterson, the content is for the most part not useless, deceptive or composed in bad faith; there are surely many competent or wise people who may benefit from such content, but it must be said that the core suffering driving people to such teachings will not be resolved by them.

The primary function of new and exciting spins on old advice is to justify the reason such advice hasn't produced fulfillment or meaning and give hope that this new interpretation will - it is not the following through of these interpretations sought out, it is the delusion of hope, which ultimately allows one to tell themselves: "This new interpretation will work eventually, and it is because I didn't have this before that I could not become happy and fulfilled - " an excuse more than a solution.

Victimhood culture is too obviously a ideology of excuse to justify spending time on.

<p>
It is of course the mix of the two delusions which is the truth: one must improve oneself in order to collectively regain respect for the common man.

Again, the conservative delusion deserves more focus for its members are more genuinely misguided yet more open to reason.

The idea in the minds of these dried out young men is that they may out-compete enough of their peers in order to ascend to an elite class devoid of struggle, and, as is true for every point in history, some will - that a new contextualization is required to inspire this shows how meaningless such cynical and processed self-improvement culture becomes.

When progress on 'improvement' slows down, the focus on 'self' becomes a focus.

One will not, and should not, expect an easier life for becoming a better person; the need for such people to contest the powers that be is so strong that one should expect being a truly good person in this day will be the most difficult of paths one may direct their life.

For the suffering which drives young men to excuse themselves from the standards of the previous century will not be solved for each man independently but through the collective exercise of power and wisdom.

<p>
So please excuse the young men. Excuse them from the standards of the richest and most out of touch parent generation who debted their lifestyle from the future, from the delusion that hard work will necessarily lead to an easy life and that their is enough prosperity for all of them, from the deep impression of failure that comes from a materially poor lifestyle.

The sooner we collectively withdraw from such delusion, the sooner we all realize how isolating and self-critical they were in a world where so much critique belongs aimed towards so few.

Turn instead to the politicians, bankers and lobbyists who devalue your savings, addict you to gambling your time money and attention, lie to you and protect themselves at the expense of your collective future while hypnotizing you to rage at the small differences in one another.

The rage is never-ending because it is never truly directed at the problem, but the late stage of buckshot excuse making is becoming too clear too ignore - and I will eventually not need to convince anyone to take this next natural step.